Pirates are a bit of a mystery, in their personal
lives. Which is probably why they maintain such
a hold on our media. Unfortunately, however, the
golden age of piracy coincided with the golden age
of English illiteracy, so what we know about them
is largely left open to anti-pirate propaganda.
What’s left is mostly historic accounts
from scholars who have risen through the
ranks through academic institutions because they
think following the rules is the coolest thing.
Suffice to say, the majority of de-mystified
pirate content is owed to modern historians
reading between the lines. While pirates are
often depicted as foul-smelling sea-barbarians,
this is only partially true. Piracy has
always been an issue around the world,
though the early 1700s hit differently.
During this period of ongoing cultural genocide,
post-war soldier unemployment, escalating trade
warfare, and homeland european unrest due
to the diminishing power of the monarchs
resulting in european naval powers having a
diminished capacity to react to martial threats,
piracy flourished to the point of not only
being profitable, but developing an ideology.
Existing primarily in the North
and South American colonies,
some of the more successful pirate captains
took it upon themselves to fill in the gaps
left by the English crown and finance well-needed
social institutions. Pirate raids funded schools,
hospitals, and infrastructure. I have heard
pirates be described as primaeval leftists, and…
well that really depends on some
people’s definition of ‘leftism.’
Prolific pirate captains, such as Blackbeard
and his contemporaries, leaned into a kind of
radical social rejection of conventionally-held
bureaucratic government structures. Their actions
advocated for a liberation from that conventional
society, in lieu of personal freedoms.
Whether or not they explicitly would
have propagated this is case-by-case.
Some pirates were, as naval officers, highly
educated. But it may have also been true that
they just wanted to shout ‘caw the police’
as loud as they could across the ocean,
without necessarily being able to
articulate why the police required a cawing.
Fast forward to the 2020s
and pirates have basically been adopted as
impromptu mascots of learn’d history queers.
Which is funny because, this is an
era where the English were tossing
around homophobic slurs at anyone
they were even slightly annoyed by.
However, the english rarely labelled
pirates as being homosexual ‘perverts.’
I read this as the fact that many English
pirates were former naval officers
and soldiers. Given that the English colonial
strategy was conquering the world by sending
wave-after-wave of boys plucked out of
discriminated underclasses, the british
labelling pirates as homosexuals may have encited
more British soldiers to mutiny than already did.
Fun fact: willful military recruitment thrives in
situations where poor people believe they
have no other option to attain a good life.
Right! We were fast-forwarding
to 2020. 2022 specifically,
where a television program about funky
gay pirates is sweeping the seven seas.
So we’re entering into the era of media where
studio and network executives are just throwing
money at projects attached to Tika Waititi
in the hopes that he knows what he’s doing.
Spoiler alert:
He knows what he’s doing.
Granted, of course, all due credit
to David Jenkins, the show’s creator.
But I feel like having Watiti’s
name on the project certainly
helped turn some executive heads at
the network. He’s got a track record.
80s-themed comic book norse gods? We’re good!
Socially-awkward camp vampires with weirdly
competent practical and digital special effects?
Got it covered!
Imaginary friend Reltih? Nailed it. Oddly.
A 1717 sitcom about queer pirates
with modern sensebilities?
Loosely based on a true story? Well, we can
cross that off the planet earth bucket list.
Ugh… I really should be careful.
It’s dangerous to Stan these days…
I can’t understand, though I’m not complaining,
why this idea got funding. Period pieces
themselves are incredibly expensive. But by some
miracle of executive competence, we have this.
Our Flag Means Death!
Here to make up for centuries of
tragically heterosexual pirate content!
And fantastic that it’s like…
got actual queer representation.
The Revenge (their ship) is a fantastic microcosm
of queer spaces. So we get representation,
and content that allegorically speaks
to our present state of queerness.
And everyone loves it. The
internet has gone nuts for this!
Go figure that when you put queer people
in media that’s actually entertaining,
it can turn a buck because people
want to watch it. Hot take:
‘audiences’ don’t care if something’s queer
or not, they care if something’s good or not.
*ahem* DISNEY.
The central pirates in the show are a
ragtag collection of weirdos and misfits
who sail together because they
don’t really have any other options.
They tolerate and even encourage each-other’s
eccentricities. There are two kissing gay couples,
one nonbinary they/them character, an alluded
third gay romance. And a bunch of just… weirdos.
And though the cast of these weirdos
tolerate theatrics, violence, seagulls,
and all manner of things that could
be considered ‘uncivilised,’ what
these pirates struggle with is
the British society gentleman.
Stede Bonnet — er… Captain Stede Bonnet is the
central character of the series. Having lived
a life of monotony, dreaming of adventure and
freedom, he decides to abandon his estate and
family to go be a Pirate. He hires a crew of
anyone desperate or foolish enough to sign on,
and pays them a monthly salary out of the
fraction of his fortune that he kept for himself.
Among a comune of outsiders, the British gentleman
is the outsider. His effeminate, lavish
needs for base-level comfort is seen at
odds with a life of roughing it on the high
seas. While the crew is initially annoyed
by Captain Bonnet, they appreciate him more as
he stops pretending to be something he’s not.
Which… may be the primary message of the entire
first season. Who you are, where you belong,
and whether or not you need to justify being
there. And if we DO look at the Pirate community
as an allegory for the queer community, then a
theme of belonging carries strong significance.
Throughout the show, there are people who try to
insist that some people are meant to be pirates,
and other people are just not. Stede, however,
seems incapable of picking up on the implication
that he is not meant to be a pirate, in spite
of all evidence pointing to that conclusion.
However, even though Stede started out as
a fail-pirate (and… you know by the end of
the first season he’s not aces), his crew
isn’t getting 10s across the board either.
The pirates of The Revenge don’t exactly have
their crap together. I mean sure, they leaned
toward that bloodthirsty pirate stereotype that’s
so damaging to the community in the first episode.
But they simmer down pretty quick.
But through Captain Bonnet’s very… soft… approach
to pirating, he afforded them an environment where
they did not need to be trapped in ‘survival’
mode. Having a base salary for existing is,
believe it or not, a great first step to
helping people focus on self-improvement.
Additionally, through Stede’s
emotionally-intelligent approach to
conflict mediation and human resource management,
his pirate ship becomes a healthy environment
to help these troubled men and others to
flourish outside their survival instinct.
Various crew members take up hobbies,
hone their existing skills, and develop
meaningful friendships and romances with each
other. They don’t… really do much pirating—
BUT…
They’re growing as human beings,
as a family, and as a community.
And this is an interesting
little parallel to queer spaces,
and a bit poignient, I think. Queer communities,
as they had been, historically, primarily composed
of people who came from homophobic families
to the point of child abuse and torture,
may be lacking for… well-adjusted people.
A huge utility of queer communities, and
especially the house system in urban centres,
was to function as support groups and
surrogate families. People in these
communities could relate to each other, and
find support as they needed to keep surviving.
Though Stede Bonnet was late to coming out as a
pirate, the coping mechanisms he had developed for
preserving himself emotionally was a benefit
to his crew. And I mean… yeah if your life
is locked in a state of survival, you’re
going to neglect your emotional wellbeing.
However, when the rhetoric of society is focused
almost exclusively on pushing a survival-geared
narrative of how you should live your life,
what value does emotional fulfilment have?
Especially when children in otherwise good
homes grow up being taught that their value
to society hinges solely on their ability to earn
a paycheck from insert-formless-corporation here.
People will put themselves in horrible working
situations for the sake of ‘survival.’ When
you believe that ‘survival’ alone is the most
important thing to work for, there is a whole
lot that gets pushed off to the side. If an
unemployed person even vocalises their need for
fulfilment outside of finding a job, they may be
met with aggression from society or even family.
Which… I’ve never known what the
point of surviving is just for the
opportunity to survive some more. Like. Okay,
you survive. What next? Survive again tomorrow?
And when you survive that, you just have
to survive some more. When do you start
LIVING? When do you get to stop surviving
and when do you get to enjoy your survival?
Nobody’s gonna give you a survival award. “Hooray.
You filled the needs of an employer who would
replace you with a robot if they could.”
The devaluing of fulfilment is something that
can be exploited. If social values direct
us to forgo fulfilment and self-actualization
until the mystical age of retirement which keeps
getting older, then we, individuals, can be
convinced into doing anything for ‘survival.’
Those on the top of the heap can
generate a scarcity of comfort,
which survivors will do anything to get at.
Nothing really freaks out the wealthy and
social elites like people whose identities
and sources of fulfilment fall outside the
typical, established channels of survival.
Which is another reason why social structures
seek to limit the permissible range of identities,
and reject and persecute those who
fall outside the typical identity pool.
Which is why you had a situation like the golden
age of piracy, where otherwise ‘properly groomed’
soldiers, officers, merchants, and freelance
sailors would abandon the Crown Values of
europe in lieu of a rock-n’-roll, live fast, live
free, die horribly and probably on fire lifestyle.
There was, in the world of piracy, an available
space where improper sensibilities had value.
And it really just… it was a nightmare for British
industry, for Spanish Genocide, and for the
French… in… general.
And that’s why I’m perfectly comfortable comparing
baroque piracy to queer communities of the modern
world. Only with… less murder. Less pillaging.
Theft… sure. Alcoholism. Comparable theatrics.
We definitely have more glitter though.
Which is actually really bad for the
environment — did… piracy have a smaller
eco-footprint than the gay community?
You know who wouldn’t go
a-fracking? Blackbeard. That’s who.
Piracy, as an ‘occupation’ or even ‘identity’
is something that European naval forces launched
extensive propaganda campaigns to prevent.
Ships’ commanders progressively
squeezed their crews tighter,
which led to more mutinies, which led to more
pirates who decided to make their own societies.
Yes, piracy was a game of brutal survival,
but it was seen as preferable to survive on
one’s own terms, rather than existing as
just another cog in the machine, unnamed,
unknown, printing money and creating comfort
for someone else. Hordes of (usually) men
abandoned the society that had convinced
them to live their lives in a certain way,
opting for a life of crime and
probably a public execution,
simply for the opportunity to be able to
live freely — to express their own identity.
And yes a lot of them were…
not great people. So that really didn’t help their
public outreach. But then again, people who have
worked in contact centres may have the same to
say about middle-management. So again it’s like
choosing between the socially-acceptable
sociopath overlords vs. the outlaws.
After working the daily grind long enough…
eventually you’re going to pick the one
who's going to let you howl at the moon.
Or howl WITH you. What is ‘going crazy’ if
not the lucid inability to reconcile the natural
absurdity of modernity which we take for granted
as civilization, and our own repressed needs for
fulfilment outside the confines of said society?
Just dive into the crazy. If not now, then when?
Which brings us back to Stede Bonnet. Baby Bonnet.
Captain bonnet. This boy. Baby captain boy-bonnet.
…Ed’s bitch.
Stede’s pirate-identity and/or queer-identity
is linked to a mid-life crisis where he
decided he couldn’t live his life
anymore. Married with two children,
he felt as if he was growing immeasurably distant
from them. There was no chemistry, there was no
joy. He and his wife went along with things
because they felt that this was all they had.
From Stede’s perspective, the struggle with
queerness is rooted in the issue of coming
out late in life. Which, believe it or not — in
spite of the hordes of media about being a queer
teenager, late-bloomers still exist. Our Flag
Means Death takes an individual who has endured
complex trauma for most of his childhood, and
has been badgered out of his personal identity.
Young Stede being in a state at home where
his father despised his natural identity,
and being at boarding school where he had
‘natural victim’ tattooed on his forehead.
Bullying like that can do a lot of things to
someone, and it’s not out of the question that
it would generate a person whose psychological
state is rooted in keeping their head down and
hoping everything passes over. Stede was never
really encouraged to pursue what he wanted,
because there was never a point in his life where
he was rewarded for expressing himself honestly.
To him, it was made clear, both deliberately by
his father, and latently through his peer group,
that his sense of fulfilment fell well
outside the socially-acceptable ways for
a man of the 18th century to exist. What
could not be done through direct lessons
and formal conditioning was accomplished
through a complex, pavlovian gauntlet
of aggressive bullying tactics and consequences
for social nonconformity that we call ‘childhood.’
These ideas of conformity to social
order are innate to human development,
and detrimental to our species survival
past beating snakes with rocks in trees.
And it’s pivotal that we develop communities
and actively seek out common ground with
other human beings and communities.
However, this sense of conformity
can be very easily hijacked by a morally ambiguous
class of social superiors who twist a definition
of social order to suit their own personal
needs, rather than benefit humanity at large.
SO.
For those of us who seek identity
and fulfilment outside these
hierarchically-defined predetermined channels,
we often need to find ways to preserve our sense
of self while ‘surviving.’ And yes, some of us
may be partial to skipping through steps A, B,
and C-through-G and go straight to moon-howling.
Which… you know. In today’s economy
that’s not an invalid option.
I’m sure someone would pay me
to howl at the moon for them.
But many of us, like Stede Bonnet, run the mental
gymnastics needed to find a way to exist within
society in spite of… that simply being not what
you are. Stede, specifically, used the classic
technique of procedurally minimising himself to
the point where he barely existed in his own life.
The more you retreat from your life, the less of
you have to actually tolerate that miserable life.
You kinda learn to… drift along. Exist where
it’s necessary but for the most part you
don’t really have a whole lot of awareness of
yourself. Or other people. Or years going by…
in a pandemic where your body is ageing
but your mind is still in your twenties…
[Dissociate.]
But before you know it you have a wife. A
house. A family. A family that you’re not
aware why you have or what to do with it aside
from society telling you that you should have it.
What could POSSIBLY go wrong with that?
Very healthy marriage!
It’s abundantly clear that Stede
doesn’t really fit in with the family life.
He’s kind of looked at as this weird obstruction
to normal living by his wife and kids. He
only really connects with his children when
he’s playing adventure games with them —
otherwise they’re kinda put off by him.
His wife, on the other hand, has all but resolved
entirely to put up with him. It doesn’t seem like
she really… dislikes Stede. But it is clear
that she is just as repressed as he is.
Their interests are completely out of sync,
they have no way of communicating because
each one is repressing a different identity.
She’s a sort of free-love artist who doesn’t need
a man, who is living the role of the subservient
housewife because this is the role she
has been taught to play her whole life
because that is the only life for a woman to
live. And Stede is gay. Tale as old as time.
And she GETS to be this strong, fabulous,
glowing woman once she no long
HAS to be Mrs. Stede Bonnet.
And even though they can’t really be bothered
to do anything more than tolerate each other,
this is apparently how it’s supposed to
be. The important thing is that you stay
together — for the children. Or social decency.
It doesn’t matter if it’s not who you are.
I’m sure forcing kids to grow up in
nuclear families where both parents are
ghosts of shells of human beings
will end up perfectly well-adjusted,
and never pass along that generational
trauma. The important thing is staying
together. Fulfilment is secondary to survival
— and all you gotta put in is the bare minimum.
The kids won’t notice.
Children: the original participation trophies.
And that attitude hasn’t really
gone anywhere since 1717.
It’s just as alive and well today as ever.
Epitomised by another hit streaming comedy.
During my research for this video I found
a textbook which claimed to be a credible
source on the topic of queer disocvery being an
issue in marriages. I wanted to read about the
straight partner’s side of the experience. But
it turns out the book was pretty much just a…
step by step manual about why
you should divorce your husband
if he tells you that he’s bisexual. So let’s
ignore that overpriced piece of biphobia.
Coming out isn’t like flicking a switch or
moving to a new city. For many queer people,
coming out can be an evolving process of
being honest with yourself, then a confidant,
then family members and classmates or co-workers.
Recently, a number of surveys report that
queer people are coming out at younger
ages than ever before as we benefit
from growing (though not widespread)
acceptance and better (though not great)
LGBTQ representation in the media.
But coming out is still generally
presented as a rite-of-passage for teens
and maybe twenty-somethings. People who are
just getting their lives started and have no
chains attaching them to heterosexuality.
Grace & Frankie is a Netflix series
that began streaming in May of 2015,
with its final season premiering this April.
The show tells the story of the titular
Grace & Frankie when they’re slapped in the face
with the realisation that both of their husbands,
Robert and Saul respectively, have been
cheating on them for the last twenty years.
With each other.
And since they’re aging into their
70s, and gay marriage has become legal,
they think its about time they stop hiding,
divorce their wives and marry each other.
Which doesn’t go over
wonderfully, as you’d expect.
Now this is a sitcom, not a hard boiled
drama, but I’ve spoken with enough gay
men of a certain age to know that a lot of the
more dramatic issues that arise in the show,
specifically about dealing with husbands
coming out, are closer to reality than fiction.
As the series goes on the animosity between
the women and their former husbands does
die down a bit, leading to them eventually
becoming friends (at least Frankie and Saul),
but the first season does little in the
way of painting a rosy picturesque ending
for married couples torn apart by homosexuality
or, in Saul’s case, likely bisexuality.
The two female leads have contrasting
reactions to finding out about their
husbands. Frankie is angry, yes, but mostly sad.
Her main focus is on keeping her family together.
While Grace is a ball of anger and resentment.
Both perfectly valid reactions to finding out that
the last several decades of life lives were a lie.
Crappy situation all around. The
kids are angry at their fathers, but
feel like they can’t be angry because their
gay, and they need to be happy for them.
That they can finally come out and be their
true selves, even though they kind of hate
them at the moment for tearing their families
asunder and breaking their mother’s hearts.
But the show doesn’t act like Robert and Saul
are the worst people in the world, either.
Outing yourself late in life can be complicated
after having lived through times when being
openly gay could get you fired, arrested, put
in an institution or given shock treatment.
It's snarled in a lifetime of trudging
along through society's views of normalcy
and the resulting fear of being
ostracised by everyone you know.
And it's marked by a nagging doubt that all of
the heartache you may cause, all of the potential
for things to just get worse after coming out,
may not be worth it with one's years numbered.
In the best situation, everyone is
okay with it and you get to have a
fabulous third act in your life. But in
the worst situation your entire family,
spouse, children, grandchildren, might
never want to speak to you again.
Not because of homophobia but because they
feel you’ve been lying to them for decades.
Finding out that the partner you believed to be
straight is actually gay can be traumatizing.
Especially in long term relationships. This can be
beyond difficult for the straight person involved.
They can internalized the sexual
rejection, feel like you’ve become
gay because they weren’t good
enough, have a cratering self-image,
and increased anxiety about what
else you’ve been hiding from them.
And I’m not even taking into account the
spouses of people who come out as transgender
because that’s a whole other can of worms. And is,
at least from my gay millennial point
of view, a lot more complicated.
Coming out as gay has been at least on the
periphery of acceptable since the 1990s,
and well before that depending
upon where you lived and what
your family was like. But coming out
as trans, even to this day, can be
fraught with any number of social and legal
issues. So let’s focus on the cis’s here.
Some people have described the
discovery that their spouse is gay
as something akin to finding out that
they’ve died. But there’s a very important
difference in the situation. When a spouse dies
you have to grieve them and eventually, hopefully,
move on to live the rest of your life.
But in the situation of a
spouse coming out of the closet,
you’re mourning the loss for yourself while
possibly seeing them flourish in a new happy
relationship with someone they actually want to
be with. Someone who, at least to your own eyes,
isn’t a consolation prize, but what
they were hoping for all along.
That kind of thing can be pretty traumatic,
especially for older people like Grace and
Frankie who, likely, assumed til death
do us part was a given at their age.
So staying in the closet and attempting to live a
straight life, while the social norm, may end up
causing more damage than you ever thought. It’s
not just your own inability to live openly that
is hindered, causing yourself emotional distress,
but inevitably creates trauma for your loved ones.
While some spouses do end up being supportive
in the end, others are driven in the opposite
direction. Beginning to support things like
conversion therapy in hopes that no other woman,
or man, will have to go through the possibly
life-destroying experience that they have.
That’s an extreme case, of course, and most
marriages that end with one partner coming out
usually just end up as a messy divorce. But the
longer you stay in that straight relationship, the
more painful it becomes when you leave it. Decades
of marriage, with children and grandchildren… it’s
much harder than just breaking up and revealing
to your girlfriend that you actually like boys.
Or if you’re a lesbian, letting your
boyfriend know that you actually like girls.
Well, knowing straight guys, that interaction will
probably end with them asking for a threesome.
But it takes a drastic shift away from “I turned
him gay” jokes when you’re in your twenties…
to life altering circumstances if
the coming out happens later in life.
It’s almost cruel to hold an opposite sex partner
hostage in a marriage while you work
up the courage to be your true self.
Coming out is almost always frightening, and
certainly doesn’t get any easier with age,
but I think we should take the lives and
feelings of the people we’re keeping in the
dark into consideration. They deserve
to live their lives to the fullest,
not just as your arm candy to
the country club or Sunday mass.
It isn’t just the emotional impact you
might have on your wife or husband though.
There’s a very real, and very deadly,
impact you might have on yourself.
In the early 1990s a study was
conducted by doctors at UCLA to
study the health of HIV negative gay
and bisexual men. By estimates about
half of the men were in the closet at
the time, and the other half were out.
The occurrence of cancer and moderate to severe
infections increased in direct proportion to
the degree to which participants
concealed their sexual identity.
Surveyed infectious diseases included pneumonia,
bronchitis, tuberculosis, and most cancers.
None of these effects could be attributed to
differences in demographic characteristics
(such as age, ethnicity, occupation, or
education), health-relevant behavioural
patterns (like drug use, exercise, or
sleep disruption), depression, or anxiety.
These findings replicated the results of
an earlier study documenting accelerated
progression of HIV infections among gay or
bisexual men who were not out of the closet.
These findings were also consistent with data
from a 1974 research study that measured both
the concealment of one’s sexuality, and
the occurrence of 15 psychosomatic symptoms
(such as tremors, headache, loss of appetite,
upset stomach, weight loss, heart palpitations,
dizziness, and sleep disturbance). Analysis
of the data they reported indicated that
"closeted" gay or bisexual men were more
than twice as likely to show these symptoms.
These were only two of many studies over the last
few decades that saw a correlation between being
in the closet and becoming ill, physically and
psychologically. Attributed to the incredible
stress placed on closeted individuals to
keep their identity hidden at all costs.
But it’s not only illness that can come about from
being in the closet. It’s physical danger as well.
Closeted men were always less likely to
have friends in the local queer community,
and therefore wouldnt be in the know about
what rent boys would steal from them or, worse,
leave them bleeding out in
some cheap room somewhere.
In the 1980s and 90s, being in the
closet could mean certain death.
While gay and bisexual men were
finding out about the HIV virus,
creating support groups, and eventually learning
that condoms could slow the spread of the disease,
closeted men from the suburbs
were blissfully unaware,
or at least under aware, of the dangerous virus
circulating throughout America’s major cities.
And once and a while they would find themselves
travelling into those cities from their nice
suburban homes and their happy homemaker wives to
meet up with a leather daddy or particularly cute
twink they kept around for when their pretend
heterosexuality became too mundane and boring.
But these casual sexual partners weren’t always
safe, with them or anyone else they had sex with.
They might have been infected, and might
pass the virus off to these married men
to bring home to the suburbs with them. And, in
some very unfortunate circumstances, then pass the
disease on to their completely unknowing wives.
This was a horror story back in the day, meant to
demonize bisexual men in particular. But it wasn’t
just bisexuals hiding in closets. Plenty of gay
men were just as deeply hidden in the shadows,
between Ralph Lauren polos and Gucci neck ties.
Theft and murder were also frequent in known queer
areas of a city. Theft; because it would be easy
to get a man’s pants off and steal everything he’s
got before running away. And murderers would hang
around looking for their next victim because
if a body was found in the gay areas of town,
it wouldnt be likely that the cops
would do a whole lot of digging to
find out who took them out. Just one
less queer they had to worry about.
An infamous example of this was
the serial killer Ronald Dominique,
who murdered twenty three men in south eastern
Louisiana between the years of 1997 and 2006.
The reason he was able to go about his sick
hobby for so long was because he was targeting
poor black men who were either gay, or sex workers
willing to go home with a man for the right price.
Looking back in history the closet was ALSO
a vice used to trap men in legal proceedings.
Take for instance the trials of Oscar Wilde.
Wilde, who was in a long affair with Alfred
Douglas, was not taken down by blackmail or
bad press, as he long expected he would be,
but by his lover’s ill-tempered and mentally
imbalanced father, The Marquess of Queensbury.
By early 1894 Queensberry concluded the Wilde
was most likely a homosexual and began
demanding that his son stop seeing Wilde.
He wrote to his son:
"Your intimacy with this man
Wilde must either cease or I will
disown you and stop all money supplies.”
To which his son replied simply:
"What a funny little man you are.”
Queensberry began taking increasingly
desperate measures to end the relationship
such as threatening restaurant and hotel managers
with beatings if he ever discovered Wilde and his
son together on their premises. In June of 1894
Queensberry, accompanied by a prize-fighter,
showed up without warning at Wilde's house
in Chelsea. An angry conversation ensued,
ending when Wilde ordered
Queensberry to leave saying,
"I do not know what the Queensberry rules are,
but the Oscar Wilde rule is to shoot on sight."
On February 14, 1895, Wilde's new play The
Importance of Being Earnest was set to open at the
St. James Theatre. Wilde learned that Queensberry
planned to disrupt the opening night's performance
and harangue the audience about Wilde's alleged
decadent lifestyle. To thwart the plan, Wilde
arranged to have the theatre surrounded by police.
Blocked by officers from entering the theatre,
Queenberry prowled about outside for
three hours before finally leaving.
Queensberry proceed to spread rumours
of the affair between his son and Wilde
all over London. And this is where the closet
slammed shot directly onto Oscar Wilde’s face
when he sued the man for libel,
declaring that he was not
a homosexual and that Queensberry was
patently lying. All at the urgence of Alfred.
In the opening speech for the defence,
Queensberry’s lawyer announced that he had
located several male prostitutes who were willing
to testify that they had had sex with Oscar Wilde.
Following this declaration, and upon advice
from his own lawyers, Wilde dropped the charges.
Under the Libel Act of 1843,
Queensberry's subsequent acquittal rendered
Wilde legally liable for the considerable
expenses Queensberry had incurred in his
legal defence, which left Wilde bankrupt.
…And also footing the bill for
every one of Alfred Douglas’ whims.
After Wilde left the court, a warrant
for his arrest was issued for charges of
sodomy and gross indecency. To which he was
eventually found guilty and sent to prison.
Oscar Wilde’s closet, as fabulous as I’m sure it
was, in fact was what lead to his swift downfall
from a darling of high society, to
a sodomite sentenced to hard labour.
Of course there should not have been any kind of
prison sentence for being gay or bisexual, and he
never should have been put in that situation
in the first place, but the facts remain.
It was the closet door that he let hang
so limply ajar, that led to his downfall.
After leaving prison, he died in November of 1900,
less than five years after being found guilty.
I just want to take a second to clarify
that I kind of am railing a bit against
heteronormative social structures. I’ve been
growing concerned, when I cover this topic,
that people feel like I’m calling them out
for not being ‘the right kind of queer.’
Which… no, I’m not doing that.
When I rail against heteronormativity,
even when I’m making a joke out of
it, I want to clarify that I’m not
targeting individuals. Having rights as an equal
citizen means that you ought to have the ability
to choose how you want to live your life. Suss
out those wild parties in abandoned warehouses,
or have a night in after a PTA meeting.
I encourage people to be who they are in
spite of social conditioning. I’m not a fan of
our society still having these expectations.
And I similiarily have no patience for
queer people who try to gate-keep other
queer people based on these approved
queer identities, established for us by
cisgender heterosexual people.
I thought the whole point of queerness is
that you had permission to be different. We’re not
really getting rights if those rights come with
caveats and terms and conditions. An ally who
holds their morality hostage until we make them
comfortable, is an ally who has no intention of
accepting us — but is willing to tolerate us.
If we look at the queer folks who try to badger
other queer people into hetero-approved checkboxes
of identities, there is an opposing, and perhaps
even equal group in the queer community that
tries to do the opposite thing, and badger queer
people away from that ‘heteronomative’ lifestyle.
Even if it is — and it is perfectly valid if it
is — the most honest expression of their self.
And yes. Our Flag Means Death does have…
or may have something to say about this?
Stede, even though he continues to
live gentlemanly in spite of being
the odd one out among his crew, still has
value in the community and has a place.
And the show makes a point of making villains
out of people who think he is ridiculous,
and has no right to be a pirate. And,
perhaps, the primary villain of the show
is the one who will not shut up about it.
Okay. We get it,
Izzy. You don’t like embroidery.
Izzy Hands is a character in the show
based on the historic figure of the same name, who
was, in fact, the first mate to Blackbeard. Who…
I don’t know if I've mentioned it yet, but he’s
also a character in the show! And played by Tika
Watiti. And is totally gay for Stede Bonnet.
But you know THAT because the internet has been
nothing but gay pirate fan art for the last week.
Izzy does not like Stede in general, but
would probably be willing to just kind
of… ignore him. But what gets under
his skin is that Blackbeard, his bro, is…
adopting some of Stede’s eccentricities.
This is a great symbol because instead of
being allegory it is, as Tolkien described,
Applicability. Meaning this one object
or icon (Piracy) has any range of ways
it can be reapplied to the real world.
Izzy sees Blackbeard’s increasing warmth,
his growing softness, and his newfound emotional
intelligence to be the work of Stede Bonnet.
That Bonnet had somehow bewitched Blackbeard.
Because Izzy’s view of Blackbeard is as the ideal
pirate, who is cruel, chaotic, rough, and ruthless
– and he believes that this vision of Blackbeard
is the true expression of his self. Whereas the
idiosyncrasies he is borrowing from Stede Bonnet
are nothing more than the tempting and addictive
soft comforts of conventional society.
Stede, as the primary influencer of what Izzy
may view as ‘normativity of the conventional,’
must be removed from the community in order to
keep piracy ‘true’ and ‘pure.’ He’s all about
that pirate purity. He loves that P.P.
In a similar way, gatekeepers tend to
be married to this language of ‘purity.’
You see this all the time in toxic nerd
communities. Things like separating ‘star
wars fans’ from ‘TRUE star wars fans.’
And out of everyone, it makes no sense to me why
the queer community has this kind of thing going
on. Some of us left our families because they were
making demands about who we are and how we express
ourselves. What’s the point of a found family if
the family we find does the exact same thing?
Blackbeard’s experience with
identity, despite what Izzy thinks,
is not too different from Stede’s.
Ed Teach did not come from a great home.
His dad was abusive so he murdered him and
blamed a sea monster, you know the drill.
Drawing attention to himself as tough, mean,
and cold was just as much of a response to
identity suppression as Stede’s introversion.
Where Stede made a persona that was invisible,
as Blackbeard, Ed projected a personality
not only did everyone see plainly,
but made it clear he was not to be crossed.
Both projections succeeded in the same thing:
keeping people away from the
truth of their identity.
The difference was: Stede decided enough
was enough, and threw himself out into
the world ready or not. Could have handled
the family thing a bit more upfront but…
Blackbeard it seems, was a little
bit more tender underneath it all.
In spite of Izzy’s persistence, Blackbeard
would privately confess his sensitivities,
and his exhaustion with having to be
Blackbeard. And how he was simply much
more comfortable as a normal name — as just Ed.
In fact when he introduced himself to Stede as Ed,
I thought it was a joke, and I had
to look up Blackbeard’s real name.
The show uses Blackbeard as a SYMBOL and I think
that lends it a lot of credit to the show.
Because Blackbeard was much
more sensitive than he seemed,
but was putting on a mask for the approval of his
peer group. He had to hide a truth about himself,
his sensitivity, his love of fine clothes, and a
willingness to put his heart on his sleeve — for
the purpose of blending into an environment.
How is this any less of an allegorical closet
than the one Stede was in?
The thing about Izzy is that he
doesn’t really care about Blackbeard. He
doesn’t care about Blackbeard’s sense of
fulfilment, what he wants out of life, nor how
Blackbeard would like to express his freedom.
Whether or not Blackbeard gets anything out of
it doesn’t matter. Blackbeard is more important
as an icon for Izzy to use as a representative of
pirate lifestyle, than whatever fulfilment he may
get out of doing anything else. And this is how
gatekeepers justify this kind of behaviour — by
finding some way that enforcing their own
sensibilities can actually be a moral necessity.
The sacrifice of Blackbeard’s individuality
is a necessary one because the utility he
gets from happiness is less significant than the
utility his fraudulent personality can provide
as a role model to other pirates.
Queer circles and Our Flag Means
Death Pirates are communities focused
around rejecting dishonest lifestyles.
However the fact that we still have to deal with
internal identity policing indicates that we have
not abandoned the components of culture which are
comfortable with dishonesty in the first place.
Our culture of dishonesty goes a lot deeper than
I think most people would be willing to admit.
The messaging of nearly every piece of
90s media was ‘just be yourself, kids.’
At which point the programming would outline
a very specific way to ‘be yourself.’
Conform to nonconformity.
Fast forward to when we’re writing our
first resume. The advice we get? Lie.
Beef up your work experience. Rebrand your hobbies
and interests so they sound more impressive.
Downplay your shortcomings and under NO
circumstances EVER talk about your disabilities.
In general.
The very culture in which we are afforded
success is one which encourages us
to behave more like robots, and less
like people. Because people are messy,
people are flawed. People have problems,
and hangups, and triggers, and traumas.
But an employer can justify how any one of
those things make you an unsuitable employee.
So these are parts of ourselves that we HAVE
to conceal. Except Stede. Stede doesn't care.
I mean, when we’re nervous over going into a first
job interview, and the advice we’re given is ‘just
be yourself and act natural’ — that advice
isn’t meant to mean: ‘it’s okay to talk about
your potential panic attacks.’
So when people say: ‘just be yourself,’ they
actually mean ‘be the version of yourself
which is held up to an impossible standard and
which contains no trace of personal flaws.’
The pressure to exist as a flawless individual
in society begins here but doesn’t get better.
Think about the last time you wanted
something. Doesn’t have to be a job. Maybe
it was an application for a grant, or a bursary
or scholarship for school. When did an authority
figure tell you that in order to get it, it’s
okay if you had to bend the truth a little bit.
What if it was a student loan.
And you were asked the question:
“have you ever had depression” or “been
diagnosed with depression?” Of course you had.
But banks see depression and
mental illness as a liability.
So where once we were talking about
society’s widespread comfort with
keeping queer people in closets, there
are a whole lot of other ways that
society pressures us to conceal elements
about ourselves. The hilarious part is
that we’re in a culture which likes to
pretend like we need to be more open.
But that just ends up with Banks putting out
promotional material for mental health awareness
while selling life insurance policies which
disqualify applicants who have been diagnosed
with depression. Like my mom, who paid into
an insurance policy with RBC for nine years
only to have it yanked away from her after her
death, because in 2014, when she was doing great,
she forgot to mention that she’d been
diagnosed with depression in 2005,
after suffering an injury that
meant she couldn’t work anymore.
Sorry, but who hasn’t been depressed these
days? Who isn’t struggling with keeping their
head above the water? Who doesn’t feel small
and insignificant when they’re just trying to
be the change that they want to see in a world
that’s out of their control? Who doesn’t feel
like they messed up somewhere in life when family
sitcoms still try to sell the two-car garage and
white picket fence as the ‘standard’ milestone
for life? When people buy starter homes.
And if this is EVERYONE, then why the
hell does everyone have to pretend
like it’s not something that’s happened to them?
Why do we live in a culture where
you have to act like you're something
completely different than you are,
and then end up pissing off friends
and acquaintances as they begin to learn
that you’re actually completely different?
Why do we have to ‘act our age’ when you turn
30, because all the other age’d gays badger
you into beleiving you’re too old to get
your kicks out of clubbing on the weekend?
Why do we present introverts as people
who have nowhere to go on a Friday night,
rather than people who would actively choose
to stay in if they could choose anything?
…The short answer is that
profit-driven media is really
only capable of depicting a limited
number of identities because there’s an
unwillingness to experiment with new ideas that
have not already been shown to be profitable.
Which is why I’m so surprised that
something like Our Flag Means Death
made it into production. That a giant media
conglomerate like Warner Bros. Discovery
saw fit to okay a budget for a show about a bunch
of weird, queer pirates who break every convention
of traditional society. Multiple instances of
queer love, at least one instance of polyamory,
a ship filled with people of different
races, and the biggest villain of the show
is the guy who wants Blackbeard to
be your typical masculine archetype.
How did this happen? How, in this media landscape
of “first gay characters” and coming
out stories did we get this show?
In the beginning of the show, when Stede
first meets Ed, he shows him around his ship.
And the place he’s most comfortable is literally
his closet. And by the end of the show,
he’s a lone man on a raft rowing to save his crew
of queer misfits. His fount family, if you will.
The people who have grown to accept him
for what he really is, and not what they
expected him to be. We need more of that
in this community. Less gate keeping. Less
dictatorial instructions on who is and who
isn’t being queer the right way. We’re all
on the same boat, and we sink or sail
together. And I think it’s better if we sail.
Under as many flags as we damn well please.